<!--
.. title: The Day The Earth Stood Still
.. slug: the-day-the-earth-stood-still
.. date: 2009-04-29 22:17:24-05:00
.. tags: Movies
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. type: text
-->


![2008](/files/2009/04/day-the-earth-stood-still-2008.jpg) ![1951](/files/2009/04/day-the-earth-stood-still-1951.jpg)

The Earth obligingly stood still for us twice this week, on back-to-back
nights. In each, a lone alien man arrives in a spaceship with his giant
robot buddy Gort, to tell humans that they must mend their destructive
ways or be destroyed.

The 1951 version was very Fifties - intrusively hopeless special
effects, and seems to my eyes to be riddled with outlandish social
etiquette and hopelessly naive politics. I suppose in the years
following World War II any platform for preaching pacifism seemed worth
a shot. If only more people considered it worth preaching today. I
completely missed the Christian allegory that permeates the movie until
it was pointed out to me: The alien comes from the heavens, and lives
amongst common people, taking the name 'Carpenter' to blend in. He
preaches peace to humankind, or else warns we will suffer a fiery
apocalypse. He is our intermediary to 'Gort' (in fact the servant of
Gort, in the original script) who later resurrects him from the dead, so
that he may deliver his final message before being taken back up into
the skies. Cute if you're into that, I guess.

Equally predictably, the 2008 version was very Naughties. Intrusively
overblown production values string together a mediochre script. The
pacifism and Christian message of the original has been replaced with a
more timely environmental message - the writers perhaps intuiting that
modern Americans are not so receptive to anti-war talk. Otherwise the
scope and potential of the ideas at play are completely wasted - lost
amidst the creative wasteland of a budget that could no doubt have fed
countries. Once provoked, Gort unleashes self-replicating insectile
microbots, which swarm and consume Philly, spreading fast. At the last
moment, Keanu / Klaatu sees some humans hugging and crying, and has a
big change of heart - the Earth deserves to be spared, after all. What a
crock.

So there you have it. Watch this space for more reviews from me -
wasting nights of my life, so that you don't have to. Final ratings:

10/10 if you are a stump-sucking mealy-mouthed pig-dog with googly eyes.

0/10 if you have any vestigial glimmers of taste or discernment.