<!--
.. title: Music 101
.. slug: music-101
.. date: 2007-05-14 10:37:21-05:00
.. tags: Journal,Music
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. type: text
-->


![Treble clef](/files/2007/05/treble-clef.jpg)

I've been riding high on the sheer joy that is Guitar Hero II (PS2) recently.
Now that *Psychobilly Freakout* is the only remaining song for which a
five-star review performance is still eluding me, before unleashing the
masochistically feverish *hard* difficulty setting at least, it's time
for me to get my ass into gear and learn to play a *real* musical
instrument.

Dithering
between piano / keyboard and acoustic / electric guitar, I've decided to
take a few week's lessons in each, to see which initially suits me best.
Accordingly (Speaking of which, I also find the accordion strangely
compelling), I had my first ever piano lesson this weekend.

[![Mr Marios Takoushis](/files/2007/05/marious.jpg)](http://www.mariostakoushis.com/html/about.php "Mr Marios Takoushis")

My tutor,
[Marios](http://www.mariostakoushis.com/html/about.php), an amiable
Greek professional musician with appropriately mad hair, seems like a
brilliant choice thus far: I'm sure we'll get along famously, with only
the minimum amount of absolutely necessary knuckle-rapping.

**Update 14:35:** Just remembered: One of the first puzzling things I
discovered is that notes on the bass clef stave are offset from the
notes on the treble clef stave by a non-integer number of octaves.
Hence, a note which would represent 'C' on a treble clef stave is
actually an 'E' when drawn on a bass clef stave. Presumably there's a
reason for this, but I've yet to hear an explanation that sounds like
anything other than a wart on the notation. Can any of my multitudinous
readers enlighten me?