<!--
.. title: jPod
.. slug: jpod
.. date: 2008-05-07 14:37:24-05:00
.. tags: Books,Fiction
.. category: Books
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. type: text
-->


![jPod](/files/2008/05/jpodcover.jpg "jpodcover")

*by Douglas Coupland*

jPod is a flamboyant return to the corporate cube-farms of *Microserfs*,
arguably the site of Coupland's greatest previous victories. Characters
reveal their desperation in guilty subversive rebellions against the
corporate tyranny that their apathy condemns them to be ruled by. The
artificial intimacy of long-term adjacent cubespace leads to the gleeful
exposure of each other's sexual foibles, drug habits, and all the
diverse pariphenalia with which they parade their various neuroses.

It's an enjoyably postmodern romp, complete with art-school
typographical experiments, the recurring appearance of the author as a
minor character, and most of all, the infusion of the whimsical
philosophies of the GenX protagonists. Even so, I can't escape the
feeling that it's a retread, rather than a successor. When he wrote
*Microserfs*, the newfound viewpoints of the digitally-savvy were fresh
and exciting, and Coupland triumphantly provided the voice they lacked.
Nowadays such views can stand on their own, indeed they are beginning to
comprise mainstream society, and observational exposition such as
Coupland's has become redundant. When a character notes with surprise
that the Kodak company still exists, and wonders how many years it has
been since they employed any young people, it might have been a wry and
insightful comment ten years ago. Now it's merely tired and lagging, by
virtue of harping on about a worldview that the target audience has all
taken as read for as long as we can remember.

Rating: 6/10 - A mixed bag.