<!--
.. title: Minerva: Metastasis
.. slug: minerva-metastasis
.. date: 2007-04-05 00:24:11-05:00
.. tags: Games
.. category: Games
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. type: text
-->


![Title screen](/files/2007/04/metastasis_1_background0000.jpg)]

*by Adam Foster*, 2006.

PC, Mod of Half-Life 2

So the digital ink is barely dry on my assertions that videogames have
problems telling a story, when what should fall into my lap but one of
those rare and immaculate counter-examples to shut me right up.
[Minerva: Metastatis](http://www.hylobatidae.org/minerva/) is a
bedroom-coded Half-Life 2 (HL2) mod that develops a storyline set within
the HL2 universe, a new thread in the tale of the alien Combine's
invasion of Earth. It has been three years in the making, and it's
*bloody brilliant*.

![](/files/2007/04/metastasis_10004.jpg)

The baseline HL2 gameplay is not changed one iota. Metastasis eschews
the normal stock-in-trade of the mod scene, introducing no new enemies,
no new weapons, no new assets such as bitmaps or sound effects. Instead,
it envelops the player in an enthralling atmospheric experience, with a
compelling backstory and superb player motivation, using a sublime
combination of architecture, geometric composition, intensely creative
injected textual fragments and well-considered use of music. This is
backed up by the superbly crafted accompanying
[website](http://www.hylobatidae.org/minerva/), that does its best to
misinform and manipulate, drawing upon the best of various [alternate
reality game](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alternate_reality_game)
influences.

![Shoreline](/files/2007/04/metastasis_10012.jpg)

The game opens with your character dumped unceremoniously out of a
helicopter by forces unknown, onto a beach under hostile fire. Running
for cover is the only option. Once out of immediate danger, your plight
is revealed in stages by a series of messages squirted onto your
protective suit's HUD by some agency identifying themselves as
[Minerva](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minerva), as in the Roman Goddess
of crafts and wisdom, a.k.a, as
[Stephenson](http://www.amazon.com/Snow-Crash-Bantam-Spectra-Book/dp/0553380958)
would have it, the Goddess of technology. Minerva's communications are
enigmatic and aloof. You are being used as her sentient reconnaissance
tool, your experiences relayed back to her remote location, that she
might investigate a small island, and its role in the Combine's
occupation.

![Down the rabbit hole](/files/2007/04/metastasis_20021.jpg)

The island plays host to the usual menagerie of HL2 critters, and
visible at its centre is a mysterious plasma discharge, which Minerva
prompts you to investigate. Clambering down, underground, you discover
the crumbling remains of old WWII fortifications, now housing the
twisted, unearthly technology of the Combine's invading forces. From
there on, things only get stranger and larger by degrees, until the
moment when even Minerva's cool begins to break, and you are left
feeling very much like an ant in a nuclear power station, with little
option but to continue exploring until the exterminators show up.

It's short and sweet - I played through the first and second parts in a
single night. But it's managed with such finesse, extending the
backstory of HL2 in bold new directions, building upon what was
indubitably the greatest PC game of 2005, possibly of all time, with
such verve and imagination that I have to agree with a Metastasis forum
posting: It might just be (*whisper it*) better than the source.

Rating: 10/10.
Bring on the third and final instalment, due later this month...