---
author: tartley
author_email: tartley@tartley.com
author_login: tartley
author_url: http://tartley.com
categories: [Write]
comments:
- {author: Michael Foord, author_email: michael@voidspace.org.uk, author_url: 'http://www.ironpythoninaction.com',
  content: "\"he is very willing to entertain the idea that the act of prayer or meditation\
    \ may well be a helpful psychological device, you can keep doing that if you wish.\
    \ Just don't dress it up with all your stupid bullshit.\"\r\n\r\nGreat way to\
    \ rationalise away something you have never experienced. Now you never need to\
    \ think about it again... ;-)", date: '2009-03-10 13:17:37 -0500', date_gmt: '2009-03-10
    13:17:37 -0500', id: 20079}
- {author: Michael Foord, author_email: michael@voidspace.org.uk, author_url: 'http://www.ironpythoninaction.com',
  content: 'Is ''recipie'' deliberate?', date: '2009-03-10 13:24:04 -0500', date_gmt: '2009-03-10
    13:24:04 -0500', id: 20080}
- {author: tartley, author_email: tartley@tartley.com, author_url: 'http://tartley.com',
  content: 'Har har! Sorry Michael, how do you know what I''ve experienced? :-)  Ohdeary.
    And ''recipe'' is just a word I can never spell.', date: '2009-03-26 00:14:41
    -0500', date_gmt: '2009-03-26 00:14:41 -0500', id: 20364}
date: 2009-03-03 20:24:14 -0600
date_gmt: 2009-03-03 20:24:14 -0600
layout: post
published: true
status: publish
tags: []
title: 25 Things About Me
wordpress_id: 669
wordpress_url: http://tartley.com/?p=669
...
---

[Facebook meme](http://www.facebook.com/note.php?note_id=55945718188)
(login reqd). Overdue, and in the third person. Deal.

1\. As a child, Jonathan used to sit and read from novels and fat
encyclopaedias every day for hours on end, while licking his finger and
dipping it in the family sugar bowl.

2\. Jonathan is
[compelled](http://ebbs.english.vt.edu/exper/kcramer/anth/Pi.html) to
either court or ditch people he meets, purely to keep the number of
active friends currently in his life a prime number.

3\. In his late twenties, Jonathan took to applying neat turpentine to
his scalp so that his bald head would make him look more intelligent and
academic.

4\. As Jonathan writes this, he is wearing [his
wife](http://thesuze.com/)'s jeans. They are at once too tight and too
loose in various unfamiliar places.

5\. Jonathan named his pet rabbit Benny, after his brother. When we found
out about the skin cancer we had Benny put down straight away. It wasn't
until a full eight weeks later that Jonathan finally got an appointment
to have his tumour removed.

6\. Jonathan distinctly remembers an innocuous seeming moment when he was
twelve years old. Doing math homework. Somehow or other he knew that the
answers he kept getting were wrong. He was hacking away at it,
determined to figure out his mistake, when suddenly, out of the blue, he
had a small realisation. He could just submit the exercise with the
wrong answers intact. It wouldn't matter one iota. He would get a few
questions marked wrong, but would still be in the top handful of people
in the class, and that would be that. Nobody would ever know that he
hadn't tried his absolute hardest. Regardless of whether one interprets
it as the onset of slackerdom or as joyously claiming his own freedom of
will, academically it was all downhill from that moment.

7\. As a child Jonathan loved ice skating, although you'd never know it
to see him now. He was put off it by an accident on the rink when aged
about 12, which left him house-bound for three months, waiting for his
prosthetic ear to take.

8\. Jonathan's first job after graduation was R&D on systems to analyse
radar echoes. As well as perennially hot-button topics like
identification of 'non-co-operative' aircraft, other applications
included the early detection of hairline cracks in the internal blades
of jet engines, without having to actually take the engine apart. In
simulating the typical damage a jet engine suffers, for a few hot sticky
days in the summer of '94, Jonathan got to be the guy who tossed thawed
supermarket chickens into the shrieking intake maw of various Rolls
Royce low-bypass turbofans.

9\. Jonathan's favourite food is Christmas pudding (in England, a dense
moist alcoholic fruit cake, you wouldn't like it), although this
probably has some unfair weighting in the grand scheme of comparative
gastronomics, due to the traditionally prescribed infrequency of its
ingestion. Next up would be good (not medium) sushi. While I'm being
picky, can I also echo Douglas Adam's exhortation that tea should only
be made using water which is *boiling*, not boiled.

10\. Jonathan hypothesizes that the normal operation of the human mind's
stream of conciousness must include a supervisory mechanism, to detect
and inhibit recursive or cyclic patterns of thought, viz. thoughts that
trigger a chain of associations causing the original thought to
re-occur. It is clearly useful for us to be briefly reminded of all
related concepts whenever a new stimulus hoves into view. Equally
clearly, it would be disastrous if we were to mentally bounce back and
forth between two or more closely related concepts, each reminding us of
the other in rapid succession, *ad infinitum*. The chain of associations
must be damped down once each related concept has been highlighted in
our awareness. Jonathan further postulates that one of the effects of
certain mind-altering substances, and of some mental illnesses, is to
inhibit this inhibitory mechanism. In such a state, the host mind is
unable to maintain a train of thought or singularity of purpose, since
every step along the conceptual route is strewn with tar-pits of
associations, trapping the conciousness in a vegetative trance of cyclic
ideas, or else in a disturbingly repetitive cycle of behaviour.
Incoherent dysfunction such as this is an outward symptom of the
unblinkered mind's new-found ability to gaze, for the first time,
directly upon the face of an actual, literal infinity. The depth of
recursion only limited by the bandwidth of conceptual reverberation.
This results in sensations of considerable awe. Both the positive and
negative aspects of such a state are compounded by the common additional
effect of lowering the mind's threshold required for one concept to be
considered as 'related' to another. This leads to streams of
conciousness in which entirely unrelated or even contradictory ideas can
be subjectively perceived as not only being deeply related, but as
actually being identical. Hence black is white, false becomes true, life
is death, one is all and all is none. The feedback causes these thoughts
to occur with great intensity, lending them a feeling of spiritually
deep profundity. The subject's stereotypical inability to coherently
reformulate these ideas when sober is directly due to the fact that such
thoughts are, under normal circumstances, quite literally unthinkable,
except for the kind of indirect and abstract representation that comes
from merely describing them, as opposed to truly, deeply believing them.
(**Update**: These ideas had clearly been stirred up of late by my being
halfway through [*Infinite
Jest*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Infinite_jest) by David Foster
Wallace, a novel about addiction, related mental dysfunction and their
relationship to freedom of will. Imagine my lack of surprise, then, when
I reach page 1,048 (footnote 269, sub-footnote a, no joke) to discover
Wallace had already written a rant of his own, very similar to this one,
on 'labyrinths of reflexive abstraction', which he had clearly been
leading up to for a long time. Like, say, for most of his writing
career.)

11\. Jonathan writes down his selections for the national lottery, but
never buys any tickets. To date, he has chosen the winning numbers five
times.

12\. People who are into nice clothes are just pathetic beacons of
insecurity. I mean, all well and good to pick a nice color of (T-)shirt
off the rack if you're confronted with a rack from which to choose. Or
to dress up with your friends for a particular event, which is a giggle.
But if you're going to more effort than that, or if you propagate the
fallacy that your industry demands it, then you're a moron and I despise
everything you stand for. Ditto for expensive jewellery or nice watches
or fancy cars or all the other claptrap accoutrements with which people
distract themselves from a witheringly inadequate life. As I write this,
I'm planning to go out this afternoon to [accessorise ]{#query
.query}for a black tie event later tonight. Stabbed in the back by the
dark tides and treacherous undercurrents of my own very human psyche.
(**Update:** From my office, the windows overlook the preposterously
over-dressed Nathan-Barley-esque cavorting which takes place outside a
London fashion house.)

13\. Jonathan enjoys stalking round the house naked when his housemates
aren't watching.

14\. Jonathan very much enjoys dreams of flying, and notes that for him,
it requires a symbolic flapping of arms to supply a motive force, and an
appropriate arching of the body to pull off manoeuvres, not entirely
unlike the motions of snorkelling. Which he also loves.

15\. Jonathan wishes his friends lived closer. On the same street would
be nice.

16\. Jonathan should have set off for work ten minutes ago.

17\. Jonathan is deeply envious of people who can juggle.

18\. As has been remarked upon elsewhere, there's nothing quite like a
freshly-shaven scrotum. Truly breathtaking.

19\. Jonathan has spent a few weeks learning about 500 digits of pi. The
world record is 67,890. (**Update:** The challenge for you is to
determine *which* 500 they are.)

20\. Jonathan has only in recent years begun to realise that he isn't
actually a very good computer programmer after all. For the time being,
he consoles himself with the philosophy that understanding this is
probably a necessary step on the long road to enlightenment.

21\. Jonathan would like to learn how to disagree with
[idio]{style="text-decoration: line-through;"}people more
constructively, without putting both them and himself on the defensive.
Was very impressed last week listening to [Iain
Simons](http://iainsimons.com/2009/02/bafta-geeknight-2/) talk about
setting up the National Videogame Archive, who's response to some fairly
cutting criticism appeared to be a deep and abiding curiosity. (Although
when I tweeted him about the discussion afterwards he half-joked that
'of course I was boiling with rage inside') Nevertheless, this seems
like a very promising approach. How to nurture it?

22\. Jonathan believes that if there was ever a God or Gods, it or they
have fucked right off, and don't seem to be coming back. We're on our
own in this. Get over it. However, he is very willing to entertain the
idea that the act of prayer or meditation may well be a helpful
psychological device, you can keep doing that if you wish. Just don't
dress it up with all your stupid bullshit. (Ah! Oh! I mean, I'm *deeply
curious* about how you reached these conclusions, please share your
enlightenment with me.)

23\. Jonathan loves each and every one of you. Yes, even you.

24\. Jonathan is beginning to realise that it is actually way more taxing
to write 25 false things about himself than it is to simply write 25
things about himself. He may have to mix and match. But can you tell
which ones are which, and identify the pattern in which they are
arranged?

25\. Jonathan is trying to come to terms with the fact that people are
almost never able to consciously think in a rational way. I'm including
you in this derogatory generalisation, but that's OK, because I'm
including me too. This would all be fine if, as the startlingly
prescient and insightful [Paul
Graham](http://www.paulgraham.com/convergence.html) pointed out, ideas
were still just badges used to demonstrate affiliation. But nowadays
civilisation has given our ideas real leverage, such that the ideas we
choose to hold now actually have some effect on the world around us,
more than simply acting as banners under which social groups gather in
the voting alliances of human power struggles. Which, again, would all
be fine, if only we recognized all of this, and took account of it when
judging the worth of our own decisions and opinions. For the most part
though, we just wing it through modern life using the subconscious
instinctive emotional responses that have served humankind and its
animal forbears relatively well through all of prehistory. The relevance
of these instincts, though, and the value systems they have bequeathed
us, are now dwindling in the face of rapid changes to the world, wrought
by our overwhelming dominance over our environment, and our resultantly
multitudinous populations. The problems we face, both day-to-day as
individuals, and those which must be surmounted for the long term
survival of our species, are drastically different from any that we have
previously encountered. Our normal modes of operation will not suffice.
We rush forwards on behavioural inertia, destructively applying the
hard-won lessons of distant millennia, which taught us that survival
absolutely depends upon ruthless conquest over other species, and
dominance over our environment. However, these behaviours are no longer
in our best interests. In fact, they lead to a unhappiness, social
instability, and needless cruelty and destruction. To break the cycle of
escalating competition and subjugation as resources are depleted in an
increasingly crowded world, there is only one desirable solution. A
future in which everybody wins. Kindness and enlightenment spread across
the globe, allowing people to happily make best use of our limited
resources. This one solution is this: People are going to have to learn
to be rational. This is not going to be easy. The first step on the road
to wisdom is to acknowledge and embrace the fact that we are not,
unaided, capable of rational thought. We need to integrate checks and
balances into our decision making processes, both personally and
institutionally, in order to preserve and build upon any glimmers of
sanity in our outlook. There is already a name for living like this. It
is called *science*. Science is not wearing lab coats or slavish
adulation of technology. It does not mean an automatic refutation of
religion or creationism or any of its other traditional foes. Science is
inherently neither for nor against any particular politics, ideology or
lifestyle. It simply means to humbly question ourselves and our
innermost assumptions, to diligently maintain objectivity, and to let
our beliefs follow tentatively wherever the evidence leads us. Those who
distract from the truth by forcing their assumptions upon others, by
espousing their own party or special interest group, or encouraging the
adoption of deeply-held beliefs - they shall not be tolerated, and we
shall remove them utterly from the decision-making process. Only with
such discipline and dedication will we uncover the path to happiness,
save ourselves and fulfil humankind's manifest destiny. Come, wherever
you are, and kneel with me, kneel before the mighty altar of science,
saviour of us all. The geek shall truly inherit the Earth.

---

25 Things About Me : Recipe

Once you've been tagged, write a note with 25 random things, facts,
habits, or goals about you. At the end, choose 25 people to be tagged.
You have to tag the person who tagged you. If I tagged you, it's because
I want to know more about you (and/or I think you might go to the
trouble).

(To do this, go to â€œnotesâ€? under tabs on your profile page, paste
these instructions in the body of the note, type your 25 random things,
tag 25 people (in the right hand corner of the app) then click publish.)
