---
author: tartley
author_email: tartley@tartley.com
author_login: tartley
author_url: http://tartley.com
categories: [IMHO]
comments: []
date: 2009-08-29 13:08:59 -0500
date_gmt: 2009-08-29 13:08:59 -0500
layout: post
published: true
status: publish
tags: []
title: Copyright and the crowdsourcing of promotional materials
wordpress_id: 828
wordpress_url: http://www.tartley.com/?p=828
...
---

There was [a
rumour](http://blog.facebook.com/blog.php?post=110636457130) that
Facebook was allowing third-party advertisers to use user's photos in
promotional materials. I imagine a photo of me and my friends enjoying
Bacardi responsibly being scraped for use in an advert.

It turns out that rumour is false. But it's not totally groundless -
it's based on the fact that some third-party Facebook applications were
behaving in this way. Facebook put a stop to it, and are to be commended
for that. In the general case, though, it's entirely believable that
this sort of thing may still happen, on Facebook or elsewhere, and it's
fascinating for me to think about why I personally have an objection to
it.

I mean, if some company does use your photo in their promotions, then of
course some people would feel this is a privacy issue simply because
they are shy about having their personal photos widely disseminated
outside their immediate social circle - pasted up on billboards or
whatever - and they have a negative emotional reaction to that, and
that's understandable.

Many people, however, would instead have a *positive* emotional
reaction. If my photo of me and friends enjoying Bacardi was chosen to
be used in an ad, it would actually be kinda cool and funny. However, I
\*still\* would object to them doing it. Even though I'm not losing
anything on this deal, and in fact I'm gaining an amount of amusement
and notoriety, I still don't want Bacardi to reap the benefit. Why is
that?

For me, it's this: Bacardi, who incidentally, have done nothing wrong -
they are my hypothetical example. In fact, let's just call them BigCorp
instead. BigCorp expect to be able to use my photo, without
reciprocating in kind. If I had tried to use BigCorp's images or music
or logo, for my own purposes, and it had come to their attention, then
they would have sued me into the ground.

It may be that they had little choice in the matter. That they were
merely acting in a way that they perceived the prevailing legal and
commercial environment obliged them to do. Regardless, the upshot from
my perspective is that they would have sued me into the ground.

And that isn't cool. There is a groundswell of resentment in me for the
way our cultural heritage - all the music and t.v. and movies and images
and adverts and logos that surround us, the things that have come to
form our whole cultural milieu, have been prised from our fingers, by
gradually increasing legal boundaries, such that none of us as
individuals, owns it any more.

[Copyright used to be of limited scope. It was designed to prevent the
wholesale appropriation of creative works such as books, which were
being copied and republished and sold by third parties unconnected with
the author. This is a fairly obnoxious behaviour, and one I'm prepared
to condemn, and I accept that introducing copyright to prevent it seems
like a good idea.]{}

[However, since the 1970's the scope of what copyright is applicable to
has expanded and expanded, way beyond its original remit. Instead of
being triggered by the commercial activity of a large book
(re)publishing entity, it is now triggered and invoked by the tiniest of
non-commercial personal behaviours, not just publishing books, but
giving a song to a friend, or drawing a comic for your blog in your
bedroom that incorporates the distinctive likeness of a character you
like.\
]{}

[Things that used to be common and socially acceptable (eg. giving an
album you like to a friend) are now clearly illegal and can get you sued
for your life savings plus draconian life-changing conditions. We can no
longer give the songs we like to our friends. We can't post parts of our
culture on YouTube. We can't put it on our blogs, or use it in any way
we feel like. We have been unwillingly converted into pure consumers of
culture, instead of participants. We have been robbed of something we
used to have.\
]{}

I strongly agree with Banksy, who feels that if any corporate image or
logo or advert is shoved into my face in a public space (e.g.
billboards, but also tv or on the web), then it is, from that moment on,
mine to do with as I wish. If I wish to appropriate the image, or
augment it with daubings of my own, then why should anyone have the
right to stop me? (\*huge separate discussion reqd here to justify this,
obviously. Maybe later.)

But this, obviously, has been utterly repudiated by the copyright
industry, acting in concert with BigCorp lobbyists, has used legal
strong-arm tactics to deny me the ability to so much as sing happy
birthday in my own restaurant without paying royalties, never mind
ripping off BigCorp advertising materials to form my own pastiche. I
resent that. I've been putting up with it for years, and in return
BigCorp has earned my ill-will on this topic.

So in answer to the question "Can Facebook's partners use your photos
for promotional purposes? It'll be funny and cool!" I have to reply "No
you can't. I agree that it would be kinda funny and cool, but on this
topic you have seriously annoyed me. We are not friends. You cannot use
my photos. Now piss off."
