<!--
.. title: A Science-Fiction Omnibus
.. slug: a-science-fiction-omnibus
.. date: 2008-12-14 17:32:47-06:00
.. tags: media,book,fiction,science-fiction,short,bear
-->

<span style="float: left">
![a-science-fiction-omnibus](/files/2008/12/a-science-fiction-omnibus.jpg "a-science-fiction-omnibus")
</span>

*Editor: Brian Aldiss, 2007*

A collection of short stories from 1941 to 2006. Most of my favourites
in here are ones I've already read before: Asimov's *Nightfall*, Bear's
*Blood Music*, Aldiss' own *Poor Little Warrior!*

Of the ones that are new to me, not many seemed to have much appeal. A
few nicely crafted exceptions are worthy of special mention: Ward
Moore's *Lot*, a tale of a family 's departure from home in the station
wagon as civilisation ends around them; James Tiptree's *And I Awoke and
Found Me Here on the Cold Hill's Side*, a tragic and visceral vision of
humanity's emotional and charismatic failings amongst the sleek,
sophisticated races of the galaxy.

Amongst the others, there are instances where the collection's vintage
lets it down, ideas that were once exciting and cutting edge, which have
been dulled by the passage of time and events, to expose the lackluster
writing beneath. Multiple tales of supreme computers achieving godhood,
for better or for worse. Tales of malfunctioning machinery that barely
held my interest.

## Great Work of Time

Imagine, then, my surprise, when the final story of the collection,
[John Crowley](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Crowley)'s [*Great Work
of Time*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Work_of_Time), of which I
have never heard until now, turned out to be an absolute triumph. 75
pages of beautifully crafted prose, all by itself it is easily worth the
cost of this collection, and a more than worthy reward for the time and
effort of reading all the other stories in it.

This final story is yet-another-novel-take on time-travel - at once bold
and understated, a nostalgic and wistful story of alternate histories
and the motives of the people charged with affecting the critical
junctures of human civilisation. An exquisitely crafted scene lies
embedded within the story's amber perfection, in which [Cecil
Rhodes](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cecil_rhodes)' 23 year-old would-be
assassin is recruited for the job by none other than his elderly self,
who persuades with a moving and cathartic retelling of how the events in
question went for him. The reader at this point is already steeped in
the bitter-sweet consequences that the outcome will have for each of
their lives, for the mysterious organisation under who's auspices they
act, for the British Empire's fading hopes of uniting the world under a
single banner versus the looming spectre of future World Wars - it is so
poignant and well constructed and performed that I immediately went back
and read the whole story over again. Absolutely bloody marvellous.

Rating 9/10, if you only read the last story in the book. Diluted
otherwise.

**Update:** A Great Work of Time is available as a stand-alone 75 page
book on Amazon Kindle for Â£2.99, and Calibre with the DeDRM plugin will
convert this into an epub which can be read on any device.

<br style="clear: both" />
