<!--
.. title: Evolved for suboptimal decision making?
.. slug: evolved-for-suboptimal-decision-making
.. date: 2008-05-13 13:12:22-05:00
.. tags: imho
-->


![](/files/2008/05/prisoners-dilemma.jpg)

I \*should\* be searching out and evaluating Python geometry libraries.
But I keep getting these niggling impulses to start hammering out my own
vector, polygon and quaternion classes. Possibly in C. Ohdear.

Why is it so much easier, or at least so much more appealing, to start
beavering away on your own code, rather than to take the sensible
approach of evaluating existing libraries? A couple of hours searching
could save you days, weeks or months of work, and libraries written and
used by several people will undoubtedly be of higher quality as well -
it should be a no-brainer.

It's easy enough to conjure up subjective justifications for it on a
personal level, but to my mind they rarely hold up to scrutiny. Reading
and understanding other people's code is said to be harder than churning
out some according to your own vision, but surely the depth of
understanding required to use a module should surely be substantially
less than it would take to write it? Likewise, curiosity, obsessiveness,
a sense of personal achievement play a part, but these motives are
deeply subjective, and cannot be used to argue the case that 'rolling
your own' is an efficient or rational decision, merely an enjoyable (or
compulsive) one. Expectations of quality also contribute - everyone
thinks that their own code is better. But this is rarely really the
case, and experienced practitioners recognise it.

On a deeper level, then, why does some part of us allow these inadequate
justifications to hold sway? Even if rationally, we know it doesn't make
sense, why does it feel so *desirable*? What I'm really asking is, why
have we been evolved to want to build our own, even though it is so
clearly the wrong thing to do?

What if we are tuned, as individuals, to prematurely settle on our own
idiosyncratic approach? The net result would be that, for any given
problem, a flurry of individuals would each set out in different
directions, regardless of what results others might have already
achieved. Viewed as a group activity, this starts to sound a little
saner. Such a dispersion of individuals would rapidly and thoroughly
explore all the corners of the problem space. Compared to the situation
where we all just build cumulatively on what everyone else has done
before, the chances of any one individual finding an optimal answer is
low, but the chances of someone in the group finding it is greatly
increased.

It's a survival-of-the-group trait, that each of us is evolved to pick a
wrong-looking answer, and then expend ourselves beavering away to prove
it. Oh dear indeed.