<!--
.. title: Modularised Personal Devices
.. slug: modularised-personal-devices
.. date: 2008-02-13 14:18:10-06:00
.. tags: geek
-->


![One man band](/files/2008/02/onemanband.jpg)

So [LC](http://lindsaycampbell.tumblr.com/post/26210504),
[Nixta](http://nixtarolls.nixta.com/post/26188403) and
[Aaron](http://www.aaronsdayoff.com/2008/02/modular-phone-answer-to-all-of-our.html)
all like the Modu modular phone idea. A tiny cheap phone for evenings
out, which slips into its super-blackberry exoskeleton for when you need
to get hardcore about your comms.

Sounds great. I can't help but feel it's the first tiny step towards
'modular personal hardware' concept I've been banging on about for
years. Think about what's good about this mobu phone, and turn it up to
11:

Your phone should be simply a transmitter and receiver. No screen. No
keypad. No memory. It just makes phone calls, \*nothing\* else. Dirt
cheap.

Your mp3 player likewise. No screen. No buttons. It just plays mp3s and
produces an audio stream. Dirt cheap.

All those devices never come out of your pocket. If you want to interact
with them, you carry ONE screen, ONE keypad control, or whatever. These
connect to any of your carried devices, allowing you to control them.

If you're the sort of person who likes a nice screen, then you buy
\*one\* nice screen. No need to also buy a nice screen on your phone and
one for your mp3 player and one for your camera, etc etc etc. Same goes
for any aspect of any component device, audio, control keypad, or
storage, or whatever.

Storage is an illustrative example. Each device has almost no on board
storage. Instead, they co-operate to share a single, central bank of
storage, also in your pocket. So instead of carrying X gigabytes in each
device (like now), you pool all that and carry 5X, shared between all
your devices. So each device could still use X gigabytes each, if that
was required. But now you also have the option to choose to allocate
masses of storage to one single device, for example take four or five
times more video than usual, and other devices can just get by with less
memory for time being.

I'm tired of buying overpriced devices that bundle in a dozen mediochre
implementations of stuff which all my other devices already do. It
dilutes competition between hardware providers by forcing all devices to
include a lowest common denominator \*everything\*. Christ, we \*have\*
to put in a fancy graphical user interface and an mp3 player in every
phone these days, so everyone puts in crappy ones, just barely adequate.
And so when you choose a phone, you are stuck with all the other crap
that your phone manufacturer decided to bundle with it. Unbundling this
functionality would allow greater competition between device
manufacturers. Users could pick and choose components that suit them.

Obviously, many users couldn't be bothered to mix and match, but for
them, resellers could assemble pre-selected configurations. No biggie.
Competition would still be enhanced, by the resellers choosing the best
available component devices. And everything would cost 1/4 what it costs
now.

It's the Unix philosophy applied to hardware. Small, sharp, incredibly
powerful tools, that each do \*one\* thing incredibly well, and lean on
each other to get things done. This gives users fantastic power to
recombine them in manifold creative ways, unanticipated by the original
hardware designers.

Welcome to my pipe dream. Everyone I've mentioned it to has called me an
idjut. Your turn.