<!--
.. title: Object-Oriented Software Engineering : A Use Case Driven Approach
.. slug: object-oriented-software-engineering-a-use-case-driven-approach
.. date: 2014-02-02 14:26:43-06:00
.. tags: media,books,non-fiction,software
.. type: text
-->

<span style="float: left">
![Object Oriented Software Engineering cover](/files/2014/02/object-oriented-sofware-engineering.jpg)
</span>

*by Ivar Jacobsen* (1992, 4th revision)

You might wonder if there's anything left to say about
object-orientation that hasn't already been discussed to death. I was
led to this 1992 book by Uncle Bob's talk "[Architecture: The Lost
Years](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WpkDN78P884)." In it Bob posits
that in the 1990s, just as people like Ivar were completing their
20-year journey of figuring out some fairly optimal ways to do
object-orientation, along came the disruptive influence of the web,
which turned everyone's priorities, methodologies and designs upside
down. In the resulting stampede, some highly practical ideas have been
lost, both in terms of design and process. This has substantially
watered down OO's ability to deliver on its promises of reuse and
maintainability. It has stranded a whole generation of applications with
distorted architectures, inside-out designs, and less maintainable code.

Aspects of these historical approaches do survive, such as the
prominence Agile gives to use-cases as a way to concretely tie together
requirements, design, testing, and acceptance. But some equally powerful
ideas, such as appropriate ways to manage dependencies within an
application, have seen relatively little use, and are only now being
rediscovered in guises such as the clean and hexagonal architectures.

Ivar's book can certainly lay claim to being one of the earliest
published sources to lay out these ideas, and he does so with a style
that is convincingly thoughtful. This is the work of an intelligent man,
honed and refined over many years of practice. The omission of modern
testing techniques are the only thing that substantially dates the
content. Otherwise I found it exciting, insightful and revolutionary. It
seems naive to claim that this book describes the One True Architecture
which is applicable to all systems. But it certainly seems very widely
applicable, and has deeply affected my thinking on all projects larger
than a couple of weeks' work.

The book also discusses software development methodology in an
intriguingly meta way, constructing an object-oriented model of the
process itself. Each software development team or organisation
represents a particular implementation of this model. Parallels with the
execution of software are drawn, with the output of one part of the
process, e.g. design work, having to produce results that conform to the
expectations of the downstream process, such as implementation. In this
way, sections of the process can be removed and replaced by compatible
alternatives, to better suit the application domain and the organisation
within which the project is embedded. These ideas seem less immediately
applicable and actionable. Maybe that's just my personal circumstance.
Perhaps they are more applicable to larger projects, which I avoid these
days.

Rating:

10/10 if you're going to enjoy 500 pages of software design principles
and case studies.

0/10 if you're not.

<br style="clear: both" />
