<!--
.. title: Remix
.. slug: remix
.. date: 2009-04-07 23:42:58-05:00
.. tags: books
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. type: text
-->


![remix](/files/2009/04/remix.jpg)

*by Lawrence Lessig*, 2008.

Is creating a mix CD for a friend an act of creativity, or a criminal
offence? When you shoot a home video of your child which has a TV on in
the background, is there really any need for lawsuits? What business do
federal laws have in trying to regulate this sort of activity anyway?

For those, like me, who view modern copyright law as a morass of
intractable problems, irreconcilable interests, overreaching government
intervention and profoundly unfair restrictions on personal freedoms,
Professor Lessig's words are a welcome infusion of clarity, pragmatism
and respect for all interested parties.

With an engaging and accessible style, he describes exactly what is
wrong with modern copyright, with clarity and impartiality, and why this
is a deep and pervasive problem that cuts to the heart of all that we
value in human culture. He describes how fixing this would benefit each
of us, from individual consumers and amateur producers, through
professional writers, musicians and copyright holders. Then, in a
surprisingly constructive final section, he outlines five simple changes
to copyright law that would, at a stroke, fix all the major problems,
vastly simplify the situation, eliminate the ambiguity over the legality
of our everyday actions, and all without apparently causing any harm or
loss to any interested party.

Rating:

10/10 If you have any interest in the forces that are reshaping our
society and turning industries upside-down within the space of years.

0/10 If you dislike freedom or free markets, or are a big fan of
overbearing government regulation and monopolies.