<!--
.. title: Soma
.. slug: soma
.. date: 2022-10-04 13:51:16 UTC-05:00
.. tags: media, videogame, linux, completed
-->

*by Frictional Games, published 2015*
![Spoilers](/files/spoilers.svg)

I can't stress enough how this write-up is filled with spoilers. If there is any
chance you'll play *Soma*, don't read this! But it's a seven-year old game, so
I'm not holding back.

<center>
![Soma - protagonist](/files/2022/soma-protagonist.webp)
</center><br />

A creepy survival horror game that leans deeply into the moral and existential
quandaries arising from scanning one's brain and copying the resulting conciousness
into alternate receptacles.

I loved the setup. A humdrum morning starting at your present-day Toronto
apartment leads to a medical appointment, which requires you to sit still for
an experimental new type of brain scan, run by a PhD, set up in a cable-strewn
side office. Sit in the chair, don the helmet, wait for the scan to complete
and- blink! Suddenly you are elsewhere.

It becomes evident that you have awoken to the year 2104, and the recorded
brain scans of real humans are being used to animate various robots and drones.
Backups and fall-backs have yanked your ancient brain scan to inhabit an
advanced humanoid robot, in a decrepit cyberpunk base, deep under the ocean,
some time after a comet strike has scoured all life from the planet's surface.

If that weren't bad enough, the base is invaded by disgusting black goo. This
infiltrates electrical and biological circuits, mimicking and improving upon
their functionality. Portions of this host a malevolent AI, and has grown
probing tendrils throughout the environment. It infects wildlife, producing
evil-looking hybrid creatures. And, not least, it has a habit of reanimating
the corpses of the last few humans, who skulk around, not in a good way. As our
protagonist asks, incredulously, "You mean they've been brought back to life?".
Our reassuring AI companion replies "Yeah, let's call it that."

The game borrows the highly effective mechanics of *Frictional's* previous
games, where the proximity of your horrific, shambling enemies cause your
character to experience debilitating symptoms, including, in this case,
static-y visual distortions as your neural hardware suffers from some
interference they emit. This applies even if you simply look at them, an act
which seems to enrage them all the more. So Your only chance to survive
encounters is to stay well out of sight, and actively avert your eyes so you
can't even watch what's going on. This turns out to be fabulously scary and
atmospheric, and lead directly to Susan catching me hiding in a dark cupboard,
staring at blackness for a prolonged period with a peculiar expression on my
face.

Spurring us along are not just threats to our immediate survival, but also
the adoption of a project, to launch the 'ARK' into space, a solar-powered
simulation hosting the last remaining brain scans of the now-defunct
human race, so that they might live a prolonged period of idyllic virtual
existence, preserving at least some echo of what humanity was.

We are accompanied by "Catherine", a simulated personality running on our
hand-held omni-tool, based on the brain recording of an AI researcher, whose
project during her lifetime was the ARK. Plugging her in to a wall or console
socket lets her interface with our surroundings, activating power supplies and
manipulating machinery. Aside from that, she provides context, guidance and
motivation, leading you through a series of undersea facilities, linked by
trains, submersibles, and the occasional disorienting trudge across the murky
ocean floor, stirred up by ferocious currents and landslides. I found these
some of the absolute best atmospheric "walking simulator" moments I've
experienced in a game.

<center>
![The ocean floor, stirred up by currents and landslides](/files/2022/soma-murky.webp)
<br />Is that another distant light up ahead? Good luck finding them while the currents pummel you,
and hideous, deadly beasts loom out of the murk.
</center><br />

Along the way, we encounter a few unforgettable scenarios. We find the failing
storage system in which the last remaining copy of our brain scan resides. I
decided to flip some buttons which deleted it, prompting my character to
respond with something like "Let this be the last time I wake up in this
godforsaken place."

At another point, we find ourselves trapped in a few rooms at the bottom of the
ocean, with the gibbering undead hammering on the door from the next room.
There is an airlock leading out into the ocean, but we would be crushed at this
depth. There is no way out. Luckily, Catherine is able to guide us into
assembling a more robust robot, one capable of withstanding the pressure - all
we have to do is sit in the chair and activate the transfer into it. We already
did this once, back in Toronto. Easy.

Except, after the transfer, we glance back across the lab at our original - the
chap pictured up top - who, we notice, is still breathing. Asking Catherine
about it, she reminds us that the brain scan is not a destructive operation.
He's still in there, chemically subdued for the moment, but he'll soon wake up
again, wondering why the transfer didn't work. So we are left with the choice
of stomping out of the airlock to safety, leaving him behind to his nightmarish
fate. Or flipping the switch to deactivate him before we go.

Similarly, later in the journey, we finally stumble across an
honest-to-goodness real, live human being. She describes how the rest of them
will be gathered back in particular locations, while she stayed to protect the
ARK. But, we tell her, we just passed through those locations, and there were
no humans remaining there. We both know that the planet's surface is sterile. A
beat passes before she announces "So I'm the last human being left alive."
She's deathly sick, and without hope. By the end of your interactions she asks
you to turn off her life-support before you leave, and stay with her for her
last moments. So this is how it ends.

Carrying on, because what else is there to do? We finally we get the ARK loaded
into the launch system that delivers it to orbit, upload our brain scans onto
it just before it launches, and - we've done it! Success!

There was a moment, about five minutes before the end, when I realized what
was going to happen here, even though my character had not. I envied him for
his naive hope. For believing there was still a way out. For, of course, the
ARK's launch changed nothing for us. Our simulations are aboard it, but we are
still sitting here, in a rotting robot corpse in a collapsing facility at the
bottom of a haunted ocean on a dead planet. The copy will enjoy life on the
ARK, but we - like the copy of ourselves we left behind earlier - are stuck
here for good. Roll credits.

